So far, we've looked at simple
temperature simulations where
each cell or object evolved on
its own, independent of the others.
Of course, that
isn't very realistic.
Now that we're comfortable
with fancy iterators, parallel
algorithms, and execution
spaces, let's tackle a slightly
more complex scenario, the
2D heat equation.
This illustration
shows the computational
stencil that we'll use.
Each cell's temperature in
the next time step
Depends not only on its
current temperature, but
also on its four neighbors,
left, right, top, and bottom.
In code, the 2D heat equation
might look something like this.
Don't worry about the specific
math or constants here.
Instead, try focusing on the
data access pattern.
First, we read temperature
from the left and right
neighbors of a given cell.
A 2D array is typically laid out in
row-major order, meaning each row
is placed sequentially in memory.
To find a flattened 1D index
of a 2D row-column index,
we can multiply the row index
by the width of our grid and
then add the column index.
Row times width jumps us to the
start of the correct row, because
each row has width elements.
Adding column then offsets
us within that row, taking
us to the specific column.
Using the same pattern, if
we went to the left neighbor
of a given cell, we just subtract
one from the column index.
For the right neighbor,
we add one instead.
Similarly, we compute the
indices of top and bottom
neighbors by subtracting and adding
one to the current row index.
Besides that, we
incorporate the previous
temperature of a given cell.
This code works fine in most of
the cases, but there's one issue.
Real grids aren't infinite,
so cells along the edges don't
have all four neighbors.
If we tried to compute the left
neighbor for the leftmost cell,
for example, we'd go out of bounds.
To prevent that, we need to
handle boundary conditions.
In this course, we're using
constant boundary conditions.
This means that we won't update
the temperature for boundary cells.
They keep their original values.
The next question is how
we actually launch this
computation on our 2D data.
If you think about it, each
cell in our grid corresponds
to a single ID in a flattened
one-dimensional space.
So we can just use the thrust
Make Counting Iterator to
generate all possible cell
IDs and then transform those IDs
into updated temperature values.
But we still need to figure
out which row and column these
flat IDs correspond to.
We use division and modulus
to reverse the process we
use to flatten the matrix.
This way we can map each flat index
back to its correct 2D position.
After that, the rest of the
code has the same boundary
check logic that we used before.
Essentially, we're just
transforming cell IDs into
next state temperatures
without needing an explicit
loop over rows and columns.
Notice that we're capturing
the pointer to our temperature
data in a slightly unusual way.
In standard C++, calling data
on an std vector returns a
raw pointer, but with Thrust
containers, data returns a typed
iterator instead of a raw pointer.
Thrust needs that type information
for various reasons, which
we'll explore later.
For now, the main point is
that you can convert this typed
iterator to a regular C++ pointer
by using thrust raw pointer cast.
This gives us the in-pointer
variable that we can
capture in the lambda.
We can start by initializing
the entire grid to a low,
uniform temperature, and then set
at some higher temperature values
at the top and bottom boundaries.
If we run our heat equation
transformation with those
initial conditions, we get results
that look a bit like an empty oven
heating from the top and bottom.
Over time, you can see the heat
spreading into the cooler regions,
all according to the stencil
computations we just set up.
An important thing to remember
is that Thrust isn't limited
to algorithms that match the
The exact signatures of the
C++ standard library.
If there's a common pattern
that can be accelerated on
the GPU, Thrust often provides
a specialized algorithm for it.
A good example is Thrust Tabulate.
Under the hood, it's really
just transforming a counting
iterator, something which
we've seen is quite common.
So Thrust gives it a dedicated
name and interface.
The call looks just like Thrust
Transform, except that there's
no input range to pass in
Because the input is implicitly
generated by tabulation.
Besides being more convenient,
specialized algorithms like
this are often more optimized.
So if you spot an algorithm
whose name and purpose match
what you need to do, it's
a good idea to use it.
Let's take that next step
and replace Thrust Transform
with Thrust Tabulate.
Notice we don't need to create
a counting iterator anymore.
Tabulate generates the
indices internally.
The rest of the code stays
exactly the same, so it's
a straightforward swap.
This makes our intent clearer
and code easier to read.
We'll likely need to convert from
the flat 1D index to 2D coordinates
in more than one place, so
it's best to follow the dry, don't
repeat yourself principle and put
the logic in a separate function.
That's what the row call
function does here.
It returns a standard pair of
the row and column calculated
from the flat ID and grid width.
We've marked this function as
host device so that it can be
called by both the CPU and the GPU.
Then, in our lambda, we can
use structured bindings to
unpack the pair directly into
row and column variables.
This keeps our code clean,
makes it easier to maintain,
and avoids scattering the
same formula in multiple places.
Unfortunately, the C++ standard
library doesn't know anything
about CUDA, so functions
like std makepair aren't
marked as host device.
Calling them inside device code
triggers a compilation error.
Like the one shown here, calling
a host function from a host
device function is not allowed.
So what are our options here?
Do we have to re-implement
every standard library type
just to make it device friendly?
Unfortunately, we
don't have to do that.
Recall from the stack diagram that
THRUST is built on top of LIBQ++.
Fortunately, we
don't have to do that.
Recall from the stack diagram
that Thrust is built on top
of libq++, a core library
that provides host-device-friendly
implementations of many standard
C++ vocabulary types.
For instance, it provides
types as pair, tuple, optional,
variant, complex, and atomic.
Not only do these types
carry the proper host-device
annotations, but they're
also optimized for GPU usage.
That means you can treat them as
drop-in replacements for the usual
C++ types, and they'll compile and
run correctly on both CPU and GPU.
Let's see how to swap out std
pair for the libq++ equivalent.
The actual change
couldn't be simpler.
We just prefix CUDA to std
pair, making it CUDA std pair.
And now our code compiles
and runs without issues.
The same pattern applies to
other standard library types.
Just pull them in through CUDA STD
instead of STD, and you'll have
GPU-friendly optimized equivalents.
CUDA STD pair isn't the only
type that can clean up our code.
Right now, we're still manually
converting between 2D row-column
coordinates and the 1D indices.
That approach works, but it's
easy to make off-by-one mistakes
and other indexing errors.
It's also not very expressive.
You have to remember the
exact formula for flattening
coordinates every time.
It might not be too bad when we're
just flattening two dimensions,
but as soon as you go beyond
that, things get ugly quickly.
Take a look at this snippet.
It flattens a five-dimensional set
of coordinates into a single index.
It's easy to make a mistake
in code like this.
It even includes a comment
to show what the actual
intended indexing is.
Wouldn't it be nice to use a
standard C++ type that could
make this type of indexing
actually compile?
CUDA std mdspan is a non-owning
multi-dimensional view built
on top of a flat data array.
Think of it like a lightweight
wrapper around your memory.
You give mdspan the dimensions,
for example, height and width in
the 2D case, and it automatically
handles the offset calculations.
Because it's just a view, there's
no extra memory or hidden overhead.
It's practically zero cost.
Using MD-SPAN results in cleaner
code and fewer bugs.
The illustration here shows
how a 1D array of six elements
can be treated as a three
by two grid through MD-SPAN.
Because MD-SPAN doesn't own memory,
You need an underlying buffer
that holds the actual data.
In this example, we've created a
CUDA STD array of six integers,
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. mdspan
will then view these values
in whichever multidimensional shape
we specify, but the data itself
remains right here in our array.
Let's construct an mdspan
based on this array.
For this case, we have to
pass mdspan three things.
First, we need a raw
pointer to the data.
Here we use the array.data
member function, which
returns a raw pointer.
Remember though, if you have
to construct mdspan on top
of a thrust container, you'll
need to use raw pointer cast.
Besides the raw pointer, we'll
have to provide the number
of rows and columns.
That's all mdspan needs
to treat our 1D array as
a two by three matrix.
Once the MD-SPAN is set up,
you can access the underlying
sequence using parentheses.
Just supply the row and column
indices, starting with 0.
For example, passing MD parentheses
1, 2 returns the element of
the second row, third column,
so a value of 5 in our case.
Besides the direct element
access, MD-SPAN also provides
some handy helper functions.
For instance, calling MD size
Returns the total number of
elements in the view.
In this example, that would be six.
Additionally, mdspan lets
you query the size of each
dimension using the extent method.
For a two-dimensional view, calling
mdextent 0 gives you the height
and mdextent 1 gives you the width.
In this example, mdextent
0 will return 2 and
mdextent 1 will return 3.
This is essentially the order
at which we provided these
values in the constructor.
For the exercise in this section,
instead of capturing a raw
pointer in our lambda, we'll
capture an empty span.
That way we can use
multidimensional indexing directly
without manually flattening the
row and column into a single index.
It'll make the code cleaner
and less error prone while
maintaining the same performance.